\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c
@c Note: the above texinfo file must include the "doubleleftarrow"
@c definitions added by jcb.
@c %**start of header
@c guide
@setfilename krb5-implement.info
@settitle Kerberos V5 Installation Guide
@setchapternewpage odd                  @c chapter begins on next odd page
@c @setchapternewpage on                   @c chapter begins on next page
@c @smallbook                              @c Format for 7" X 9.25" paper
@c %**end of header

@paragraphindent 0
@iftex
@parskip 6pt plus 6pt
@end iftex

@include definitions.texinfo
@c @set EDITION b7-1
@set EDITION [working copy]

@finalout                               @c don't print black warning boxes

@titlepage
@title @value{PRODUCT} Implementor's Guide
@subtitle Release:  @value{RELEASE}
@subtitle Document Edition:  @value{EDITION}
@subtitle Last updated:  @value{UPDATED}
@author @value{COMPANY}

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll

@iftex
@include copyright.texinfo
@end iftex
@end titlepage

@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up

@ifinfo
This file contains internal implementor's information for the
@value{RELEASE} release of @value{PRODUCT}.  

@include copyright.texinfo

@end ifinfo

@c The master menu is updated using emacs19's M-x texinfo-all-menus-update
@c function.  Don't forget to run M-x texinfo-every-node-update after
@c you add a new section or subsection, or after you've rearranged the
@c order of sections or subsections.  Also, don't forget to add an @node
@c comand before each @section or @subsection!  All you need to enter
@c is:
@c
@c @node New Section Name
@c @section New Section Name
@c
@c M-x texinfo-every-node-update will take care of calculating the
@c node's forward and back pointers.
@c
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@menu
* Introduction::                
* Compiler and OS Requirements::  
* Networking::                  
* Thread Safety::               
* Shared Libraries::            
* Porting Issues::              
@end menu

@node Introduction, Compiler and OS Requirements, Top, Top
@chapter Introduction

This file contains internal implementor's information for
@value{PRODUCT}.  It is currently contains information that was removed
from install.texi; eventually it will have more detailed information on
the internals of the @value{PRODUCT}.

@node Compiler and OS Requirements, Networking, Introduction, Top
@chapter Compiler and OS Requirements

The basic Kerberos libraries are entirely written in C.
However, we do assume full ANSI C (1989) support, typical 32- or
64-bit twos-complement architectures (@code{char} is 8 bits,
@code{short} is 16 bits, @code{int} is 32 bits, byte order is 1234 or
4321), and a few aspects of ISO C 1999:

@itemize @bullet
@item
support for inline functions, even if the keyword isn't @code{inline}
@item
64-bit arithmetic types (needed for sequence numbers in GSSAPI)
@end itemize

These are handled through the internal header file
@file{k5-platform.h}.

We also conditionally tailor code for the GNU C compiler in a few
places where it helps performance or debugging, but the code should
still work fine with other C compilers.

On UNIX platforms, ... @i{(should outline what POSIX stuff we
require)}.

See also @ref{Advanced Shared Library Requirements}, for UNIX and
Windows systems.

Our makefiles are intended to support building from the top level with
a POSIX-compliant version of @code{make}, and parallel builds using
GNU @code{make}.  The latter sometimes comes at the cost of efficiency with
non-GNU versions; for example, some targets in some directories will
always be rebuilt with certain versions of @code{make}, even though
the real dependencies are not out of date, because some versions of
@code{make} don't understand how we're using phony intermediate
targets to manage building in subdirectories in parallel builds.
(Actually, this is more my view of how we've been doing things than
official policy.  ---Ken)

@node Networking, Thread Safety, Compiler and OS Requirements, Top
@chapter Networking

@menu
* Socket API::                  
* IPv6 Support::                
* Local Addresses::             
* Host Address Lookup::         
@end menu

@node Socket API, IPv6 Support, Networking, Networking
@section Socket API

Someone should describe the API subset we're allowed to use with
sockets, how and when to use @code{SOCKET_ERRNO}, @i{etc}.

Note that all new code doing hostname and address translation should
use @code{getaddrinfo} and friends.  (@xref{Host Address Lookup}.)

@node IPv6 Support, Local Addresses, Socket API, Networking
@section IPv6 Support

Most of the IPv6 support is keyed on the macro @code{KRB5_USE_INET6}.
If this macro is not defined, there should be no references to
@code{AF_INET6}, @code{struct sockaddr_in6}, @i{etc}.

The @code{configure} scripts will check for the existence of various
functions, macros and structure types to decide whether to enable the
IPv6 support.  You can also use the @samp{--enable-ipv6} or
@samp{--disable-ipv6} options to override this decision.

Regardless of the setting of @code{KRB5_USE_INET6}, some aspects of
the new APIs devised for IPv6 are used throughout the code, because it
would be too difficult maintain code for the IPv6 APIs and for the old
APIs at the same time.  But for backwards compatibility, we try to
fake them if the system libraries don't provide them, at least for
now.  This means we sometimes use slightly modified versions of the
APIs, but we try to keep the modifications as non-intrusive as
possible.  Macros are used to rename struct tags and function names,
so don't @code{#undef} any of these names.

@table @code

@item getaddrinfo
@itemx getnameinfo
@itemx freeaddrinfo
@itemx gai_strerror
@itemx struct addrinfo
Always include the header file @file{fake-addrinfo.h} before using
these.  If the native system doesn't provide them, the header file
will, using support functions that will call @code{gethostbyname} and
the like in the native libraries.  (This is similar to how the Winsock
2 headers work, depending on some of the predefined macros indicating
the target OS version, though they define the support functions
directly in the header, as our code used to do.)

We also provide ``wrapper'' versions on some systems where a native
implementation exists but the data it returns is broken in some way.

So these may not always be thread-safe, and they may not always
provide IPv6 support, but the API will be consistent.

@item struct sockaddr_storage
@itemx socklen_t
These are provided by @file{socket-utils.h}, if the native headers
don't provide them.  @code{sockaddr_storage} contains a
@code{sockaddr_in}, so by definition it's big enough to hold one; it
also has some extra padding which will probably make it big enough to
hold a @code{sockaddr_in6} if the resulting binary should get run on a
kernel with IPv6 support.

Question: Should these simply be moved into @file{port-sockets.h}?

@end table

IRIX 6.5.7 has no IPv6 support.  Of the systems most actively in the
MIT's Athena environment (used by MIT's Kerberos UNIX developers),
this is the only one without built-in IPv6 support.  In another year
or so we probably won't be using those systems any more, and we may
consider dropping support for systems without IPv6 support.

Somewhere between IRIX 6.5.14 and 6.5.16, partial IPv6 support was
introduced to the extent that the configuration system detects the
IPv6 support and attempts to use it.  Code compiles, but then upon
linking, one discovers that ``in6addr_any'' is not defined in any
system library.  The header file @file{fake-addrinfo.h} provides a
static copy as a workaround.  This run time IPv6 code has still not
been tested.

Some utility functions or macros are also provided to give a
convenient shorthand for some operations, and to retain compile-time
type checking when possible (generally using inline functions but only
when compiling with GCC).

@table @code

@item socklen(struct sockaddr *)
Returns the length of the @code{sockaddr} structure, by looking at the
@code{sa_len} field if it exists, or by returning the known sizes of
@code{AF_INET} and @code{AF_INET6} address structures.

@item sa2sin(struct sockaddr *)
@itemx sa2sin6(struct sockaddr *)
@itemx ss2sa(struct sockaddr_storage *)
@itemx ss2sin(struct sockaddr_storage *)
@itemx ss2sin6(struct sockaddr_storage *)
Pointer type conversions.  Use these instead of plain casts, to get
type checking under GCC.

@end table

@node Local Addresses, Host Address Lookup, IPv6 Support, Networking
@section Local Addresses

(Last update: 2005-04-21, but most of the information dates back to
early 2002.)

Different systems have different ways of finding the local network
addresses.

On Windows, @code{gethostbyname} is called on the local host name to get a
set of addresses.  If that fails, a UDP socket is ``connected'' to a
particular IPv4 address, and the local socket name is retrieved, its
address being treated as the one local network address.  Future
versions of the Windows code should be able to actually examine local
interfaces.

On (most?) UNIX systems, there is an @code{ioctl} called
@code{SIOCGIFCONF} which gets interface configuration information.
The behavior of this @code{ioctl} varies across UNIX systems though.
It takes as input a buffer to fill with data structures, but if the
buffer isn't big enough, the behavior isn't well defined.  Sometimes
you get an error, sometimes you get incomplete data.  Sometimes you
get a clear indication that more space was needed, sometimes not.  A
couple of systems have additional @code{ioctl}s that can be used to
determine or at least estimate the correct size for the buffer.  In
Solaris, Sun has introduced @code{SIOCGLIFCONF} for querying IPv6
addresses, and restricts @code{SIOCGIFCONF} to IPv4 only.  (** We
should actually check if that's true.)  They also added
@code{SIOCGIFNUM} and @code{SIOCGLIFNUM} for querying the number of
interfaces.  HP-UX 11 also has @code{SIOCGLIFCONF}, but it requires a
different data structure, and we haven't finished that support yet.

We (Ken Raeburn in particular) ran some tests on various systems to
see what would happen with buffers of various sizes from much smaller
to much larger than needed for the actual data.  The buffers were
filled with specific byte values, and then checked to see how much of
the buffer was actually written to.  The ``largest gap'' values listed
below are the largest number of bytes we've seen left unused at the
end of the supplied buffer when there were more entries to return.
These values may of coures be dependent on the configurations of the
particular systems we wre testing with.  (See
@file{lib/krb5/os/t_gifconf.c} for the test program.)

NetBSD 1.5-alpha: The returned @code{ifc_len} is the desired amount of
space, always.  The returned list may be truncated if there isn't
enough room; no overrun.  Largest gap: 43.  However, NetBSD has
@code{getifaddrs}, which hides all the ugliness within the C library.

BSD/OS 4.0.1 (courtesy djm): The returned @code{ifc_len} is equal to
or less than the supplied @code{ifc_len}.  Sometimes the entire buffer
is used; sometimes N-1 bytes; occasionally, the buffer must have quite
a bit of extra room before the next structure will be added.  Largest
gap: 39.

Solaris 7,8,9: Return @code{EINVAL} if the buffer space is too small
for all the data to be returned, including when @code{ifc_len} is 0.
Solaris is the only system I've found so far that actually returns an
error.  No gap.  However, @code{SIOCGIFNUM} may be used to query the
number of interfaces.

Linux 2.2.12 (Red Hat 6.1 distribution, x86), 2.4.9 (RH 7.1, x86): The
buffer is filled in with as many entries as will fit, and the size
used is returned in @code{ifc_len}.  The list is truncated if needed,
with no indication.  Largest gap: 31.  @emph{However}, this interface
does not return any IPv6 addresses.  They must be read from a file
under @file{/proc}.  (This appears to be what the @samp{ifconfig}
program does.)

IRIX 6.5.7: The buffer is filled in with as many entries as will fit
in N-1 bytes, and the size used is returned in @code{ifc_len}.
Providing exactly the desired number of bytes is inadequate; the
buffer must be @emph{bigger} than needed.  (E.g., 32->0, 33->32.)  The
returned @code{ifc_len} is always less than the supplied one.  Largest
gap: 32.

AIX 4.3.3: Sometimes the returned @code{ifc_len} is bigger than the
supplied one, but it may not be big enough for @emph{all} the
interfaces.  Sometimes it's smaller than the supplied value, even if
the returned list is truncated.  The list is filled in with as many
entries as will fit; no overrun.  Largest gap: 143.

Older AIX: We're told by W. David Shambroom in RT ticket 919 that
older versions of AIX have a bug in the @code{SIOCGIFCONF}
@code{ioctl} which can cause them to overrun the supplied buffer.
However, we don't yet have details as to which version, whether the
overrun amount was bounded (e.g., one @code{ifreq}'s worth) or not,
whether it's a real buffer overrun or someone assuming it was because
@code{ifc_len} was increased, @i{etc}.  Once we've got details, we can
try to work around the problem.

Digital UNIX 4.0F: If input @code{ifc_len} is zero, return an
@code{ifc_len} that's big enough to include all entries.  (Actually,
on our system, it appears to be larger than that by 32.)  If input
@code{ifc_len} is nonzero, fill in as many entries as will fit, and
set @code{ifc_len} accordingly.  (Tested only with buffer previously
filled with zeros.)

Tru64 UNIX 5.1A: Like Digital UNIX 4.0F, except the ``extra'' space
indicated when the input @code{ifc_len} is zero is larger.  (We got
400 out when 320 appeared to be needed.)

So... if the returned @code{ifc_len} is bigger than the supplied one,
we'll need at least that much space -- but possibly more -- to hold
all the results.  If the returned value is a little smaller or the
same, we may still need more space.

The heuristic we're using on most systems now is to keep growing the
buffer until the unused space is larger than an @code{ifreq} structure
by some safe margin.

@node Host Address Lookup,  , Local Addresses, Networking
@section Host Address Lookup

The traditional @code{gethostbyname} function is not thread-safe, and
does not support looking up IPv6 addresses, both of which are becoming
more important.  New standards have been in development that should
address both of these problems.  The most promising is
@code{getaddrinfo} and friends, which is part of the Austin Group and
UNIX 98(?) specifications.  Code in the MIT tree has mostly been
converted to use this interface.

@quotation
(Question: What about @code{inet_ntop} and @code{inet_pton}?  We're
not using them at the moment, but some bits of code would be
simplified if we were to do so, when plain addresses and not socket
addresses are already presented to us.)
@end quotation

The @code{getaddrinfo} function takes a host name and service name and
returns a linked list of structures indicating the address family,
length, and actual data in ``sockaddr'' form.  (That is, it includes a
pointer to a @code{sockaddr_in} or @code{sockaddr_in6} structure.)
Depending on options set via the @code{hints} input argument, the results
can be limited to a single address family (@i{e.g.}, for IPv4
applications), and the canonical name of the indicated host can be
returned.  Either the host or service can be a null pointer, in which
case only the other is looked up; they can also be expressed in
numeric form.  This interface is extensible to additional address
families in the future.  The returned linked list can be freed with
the @code{freeaddrinfo} function.

The @code{getnameinfo} function does the reverse -- given an address
in ``sockaddr'' form, it converts the address and port values into
printable forms.

Errors returned by either of these functions -- as return values, not
global variables -- can be translated into printable form with the
@code{gai_strerror} function.

Some vendors are starting to implement @code{getaddrinfo} and friends,
however, some of the implementations are deficient in one way or
another.

@table @asis

@item AIX
As of AIX 4.3.3, @code{getaddrinfo} returns sockaddr structures
without the family and length fields filled in.

@item GNU libc
The GNU C library, used on GNU/Linux systems, has had a few problems
in this area.  One version would drop some IPv4 addresses for some
hosts that had multiple IPv4 and IPv6 addresses.

In GNU libc 2.2.4, when the DNS is used, the name referred to by PTR
records for each of the addresses is looked up and stored in the
@code{ai_canonname} field, or the printed numeric form of the address
is, both of which are wrong.

@item IRIX
No known bugs here, but as of IRIX 6.5.7, the version we're using at
MIT, these functions had not been implemented.

@item Mac OS X
Two problems have been found with @code{getaddrinfo} on Mac OS X, at
least under version 10.3.  First, while @code{gethostbyname} data is
cached to make multiple lookups of the same name (@i{e.g.}, by
different parts of the code that need to know about the same server
host), @code{getaddrinfo} results are not cached, so multiple queries
mean multiple DNS requests, which means more delays if the DNS servers
are not close by and fast to respond.  We've implemented a cache of
our own to work around this, though it only applies to multiple
lookups in a short period of time within the same application process,
and it's only implemented for the Mac at the moment.

Second, the Mac libraries will generate a DNS SRV RR query; as far as
I [Ken] can tell this is a bug, but Apple seems to consider it a
feature.  (Call @code{getaddrinfo("example.com", "telnet", ...)} and
you get a SRV record query, but the spec on SRV records says you must
not use them unless the specification for the service in question says
to.)  Yet more network traffic for each name to look up.

@item NetBSD
As of NetBSD 1.5, this function is not thread-safe.  In 1.5X
(intermediate code snapshot between 1.5 and 1.6 releases), the
@code{ai_canonname} field can be empty, even if the
@code{AI_CANONNAME} flag was passed.  In particular, this can happen
if a numeric host address string is provided.  Also, numeric service
names appear not to work unless the stream type is given; specifying
the TCP protocol is not enough.

@item Tru64 UNIX
In Tru64 UNIX 5.0, @code{getaddrinfo} is available, but requires that
@code{<netdb.h>} be included before its use; that header file defines
@code{getaddrinfo} as a macro expanding to either @code{ogetaddrinfo}
or @code{ngetaddrinfo}, and apparently the symbol @code{getaddrinfo}
is not present in the system library, causing the @code{configure}
test for it to fail.  Technically speaking, I [Ken] think Compaq has
it wrong here, I think the symbol is supposed to be available even if
the application uses @code{#undef}, but I have not confirmed it in the
spec.

@item Windows
According to Windows documentation, the returned @code{ai_canonname}
field can be null even if the @code{AI_CANONNAME} flag is given.

@end table

For most systems where @code{getaddrinfo} returns incorrect data,
we've provided wrapper versions that call the system version and then
try to fix up the returned data.

For systems that don't provide these functions at all, we've provided
replacement versions that neither are thread-safe nor support IPv6,
but will allow us to convert the rest of our code to assume the
availability of @code{getaddrinfo}, rather than having to use two
branches everywhere, one for @code{getaddrinfo} and one for
@code{gethostbyname}.  These replacement functions do use
@code{gethostbyname} and the like; for some systems it would be
possible to use @code{gethostbyname2} or @code{gethostbyname_r} or
other such functions, to provide thread safety or IPv6 support, but
this has not been a priority for us, since most modern systems have
these functions anyways.  And if they don't, they probably don't have
real IPv6 support either.

Including @file{fake-addrinfo.h} will enable the wrapper or
replacement versions when needed.  The functions are actually defined
in the support library in @file{src/util/support}, added in the 1.4
release.

Do not assume that @code{ai_canonname} will be set when the
@code{AI_CANONNAME} flag is set.  Check for a null pointer before
using it.

@node Thread Safety, Shared Libraries, Networking, Top
@chapter Thread Safety

Work is still needed as this section is being written.  However, we've
made a lot of progress.

@menu
* Kerberos API Thread Safety::  
* Thread System Requirements::  
* Internal Thread API::         
* Thread Shim Layer Implementation::  
@end menu

@node Kerberos API Thread Safety, Thread System Requirements, Thread Safety, Thread Safety
@section Kerberos API Thread Safety

We assume that a @code{krb5_context} or a @code{krb5_auth_context}
will be used in only one thread at a time, and any non-opaque object
clearly being modified by the application code (@i{e.g.}, a
@code{krb5_principal} having a field replaced) is not being used in
another thread at the same time.

A credentials cache, key table, or replay cache object, once the C
object is created, may be used in multiple threads simultaneously;
internal locking is done by the implementations of those objects.  (We
assume that object destructors are invoked only when all other threads
are finished with the object.)  @i{(Iterators?  Probably okay now, but
needs review.)}  However, this doesn't mean that we've fixed any
problems there may be regarding simultaneous access to on-disk files
from multiple processes, and in fact if a process opens a disk file
multiple times, the same problems may come up.

Any file locking issues may become worse, actually.  UNIX file locking
with @code{flock} is done on a per-process basis, and closing a file
descriptor that was opened on a file releases any locks the process
may have on that file, even if they were obtained using other,
still-open file descriptors.  UNIX file locks are used for credentials
caches and keytab files; the replay cache implementation is already
known to be unsafe in not using file locking.

We MAY implement --- but haven't yet --- a ``fix'' whereby open files
are tracked by name (and per object type), and a new attempt to open
one gets a handle that uses the same open file descriptor, even if it
appears as two objects to the application.  This won't address the
problem of getting the same file via two names that look different,
but it may be ``good enough.''

GSSAPI ....

Strictly speaking, the GSSAPI specification says nothing about thread
safety, so for best portability, a GSSAPI application probably should
not assume that a GSSAPI implementation is thread-safe in any way.  On
the other hand, the GSSAPI specification doesn't explicitly say that
it's safe to use in a program that uses the Berkeley sockets API,
either; at some point, you have to start making some assumptions.

A GSSAPI security context, like a @code{krb5_context}, may be used
only in one thread at a time.  The GSSAPI specification gives precise
definitions of C data structures for buffers, object identifiers, OID
sets, and channel bindings, that do not allow for the addition of a
mutex.  Thus, these objects must not be modified by one thread while
in use by another.  (All of the GSSAPI functions that modify these
types of objects should be obvious; they're listed as ``modify''
parameters in the specification.  In fact, aside from the case of
@code{gss_add_oid_set_member}, they're generally output arguments,
with the previous value ignored.)

The function @code{gss_add_cred} can modify the
@code{input_cred_handle} object, if a null @code{output_cred_handle}
argument is supplied.  Thus, all @code{gss_cred_id_t} objects must
have mutexes, and all accesses (except in the functions creating or
destroying them) must acquire the mutex first.

Note that the use of @code{const} in the GSSAPI C bindings is not a
useful guide to when an object might or might not be modified.  In
most cases, @code{const} is applied to handle arguments, which are
defined as arithmetic or pointer types.  It applies to the argument
itself, not the data pointed to @i{if} the type is a pointer; this
would mean that the GSSAPI function in question cannot modify the
value of its handle parameter, and puts no constraints on
modifications to the object indicated by the handle.  And according to
the C type compatibility rules, the function definition can omit those
@code{const} qualifiers anyways.@footnote{If you're thinking that this
means the use of @code{const} in the GSSAPI C bindings is confusing
and/or useless, you're right.}




@node Thread System Requirements, Internal Thread API, Kerberos API Thread Safety, Thread Safety
@section Thread System Requirements

We support a few types of environments with regard to thread support:

@itemize @bullet

@item
Windows native threads.  The objects used by the Windows thread
support functions generally need run-time initialization; this is done
through the library initialization function.  (@xref{Advanced Shared
Library Requirements}.)

@item
POSIX threads, with weak reference support so we can tell whether the
thread code was actually linked into the current executable.  If the
functions aren't available, we assume the process is single-threaded
and ignore locks.  (We do assume that the thread support functions
won't show up half-way through execution of the program.)  In order to
support single-threaded programs wanting to load Kerberos or GSSAPI
modules through a plug-in mechanism, we don't list the pthread library
in the dependencies of our shared libraries.

@item
POSIX threads, with the library functions always available, even if
they're stub versions that behave normally but don't permit the
creation of new threads.

On AIX 4.3.3, we do not get weak references or useful stub functions,
and calling @code{dlopen} apparently causes the pthread library to get
loaded, so we've decided to link against the pthread library always.

On Tru64 UNIX 5.1, we again do not get weak references or useful stub
functions.  Rather than look for yet another approach for this one
platform, we decided to always link against the pthread library on
this platform as well.  This may break single-threaded applications
that load the Kerberos libraries after startup.  A clean solution,
even if platform-dependent, would be welcome.

@item
Single-threaded.  No locking is performed, any ``thread-local''
storage is in fact global, @i{etc}.

@end itemize

If @code{pthread_once} is not provided in functional form in the
default libraries, and weak references are not supported, we always
link against the pthread libraries.  (Tru64, AIX.)

System routines: @code{getaddrinfo} (not always implemented
thread-safe), @code{gethostbyname_r}, @code{gmtime_r},
@code{getpwnam_r} (but interfaces vary, see @file{k5-platform.h}),
@code{res_nsearch} (but watch for resource leaks).

Unsafe system routines: @code{setenv}, @code{setlocale}.

@node Internal Thread API, Thread Shim Layer Implementation, Thread System Requirements, Thread Safety
@section Internal Thread API

Some ideas were discussed on the @samp{krbdev} mailing list, and while
the current implementation does largely resemble the scheme Ken
Raeburn proposed, some details have changed.

The following macros in @file{k5-thread.h} implement a locking scheme
similar to POSIX threads, with fewer features.

@deftp {Data type} k5_mutex_t
This is the type of a mutex to be used by the Kerberos libraries.  Any
object of this type needs initialization.  If the object is
dynamically allocated, @code{k5_mutex_init} must be used; if the
object is allocated statically, it should be initialized at compile
time with @code{K5_MUTEX_PARTIAL_INITIALIZER} and then
@code{k5_mutex_finish_init} should be called at run time.  (In
general, one of these will do the work, and the other will do nothing
interesting, depending on the platform.  When the debugging code is
turned on, it will check that both were done.  However, as far as I
know, it should work to use just @code{k5_mutex_init} on a mutex in
static storage.)

The mutex may be used only within the current process.  It should not
be created in memory shared between processes.  (Will it work in a
child process after @code{fork()}?  I think so.)

The @code{k5_mutex_t} object contains more than an operating-system
mutex; it may also contain debugging information such as the file and
line number in the Kerberos code where the last mutex operation was
performed, information for gathering statistics on mutex usage,
@i{etc}., depending on compile-time options.

This type @emph{is not} a simple typedef for the native OS mutex
object, to prevent programmers from accidentally assuming that
arbitrary features of the native thread system will always be
available.  (If someone wishes to make use of native thread system
features in random library code, they'll have to go further out of
their way to do it, and such changes probably won't be accepted in the
main Kerberos code base at MIT.)

If thread support is disabled, a simple flag will be stored in place
of the operating-system mutex.  This flag indicates the ``locked''
state, and is checked in the @code{k5_mutex_lock} and
@code{k5_mutex_unlock} macros so that we can detect some cases of
improperly written code even if thread support is not built in.  The
other debugging fields will still be present as well.

If POSIX thread support and weak references are available, both the
POSIX mutex and a flag will be included; which one is used is
determined at run time depending on whether the thread support
routines are available.
@end deftp

@defvr Macro K5_MUTEX_PARTIAL_INITIALIZER
Value to be used for compile-time initialization of a mutex in static
storage.
@end defvr

@deftypefn Macro int k5_mutex_finish_init (k5_mutex_t *@var{m})
Finishes run-time initialization, if such is needed, of a mutex that
was initialized with @code{K5_MUTEX_PARTIAL_INITIALIZER}.  This macro
must be called before the mutex can be locked; usually this is done
from library initialization functions.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro int k5_mutex_init (k5_mutex_t *@var{m})
Initializes a mutex.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro int k5_mutex_destroy (k5_mutex_t *@var{m})
Destroys a mutex, whether allocated in static or heap storage.  All
mutexes should be destroyed before the containing storage is freed, in
case additional system resources have been allocated to manage them.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro int k5_mutex_lock (k5_mutex_t *@var{m})
@deftypefnx Macro int k5_mutex_unlock (k5_mutex_t *@var{m})
Lock or unlock a mutex, returning a system error code if an error
happened, or zero for success.  (Typically, the return code from
@code{k5_mutex_unlock} is ignored.)
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro void k5_mutex_assert_locked (k5_mutex_t *@var{m})
@deftypefnx Macro void k5_mutex_assert_unlocked (k5_mutex_t *@var{m})
These macros may be used in functions that require that a certain
mutex be locked by the current thread, or not, at certain points
(typically on entry to the function).  They may generate error
messages or debugger traps, or abort the program, if the mutex is not
in the expected state.  Or, they may simply do nothing.

It is not required that the OS mutex interface let the application
code determine the state of a mutex; hence these are not specified as
a single macro returning the current state, to be checked with
@code{assert}.
@end deftypefn

Mutexes should be assumed not to be recursive; if a thread has the
mutex locked already, attempting to lock it again is an error and may
have unpredictable results (error return, abort, data corruption).
There is also no support assumed for ``trylock'' or ``lock with
timeout'' operations.

Kerberos library code should use the macros above, and ports to new
thread systems should be done through the @code{k5_os_} layer.
(@xref{Thread Shim Layer Implementation}.)

Thread-local storage is managed through another interface layer:

@deftp {Enumerator} k5_key_t
This is an enumeration type which indicates which of the per-thread
data objects is to be referenced.
@end deftp

@deftypefn Macro int k5_key_register (k5_key_t @var{key}, void (*@var{destructor})(void*))
Registers a thread-local storage key and a function to destroy a
stored object if the thread exits.  This function must be called
before @code{k5_setspecific} can be used.  Currently @var{destructor}
must not be a null pointer; note, however, that the standard library
function @code{free} is of the correct type to be used here if the
allocated data doesn't require any special cleanup besides releasing
one block of storage.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro void *k5_getspecific (k5_key_t @var{key})
@deftypefnx Macro int k5_setspecific (k5_key_t @var{key}, void *@var{value})
As with the POSIX interface, retrieve or store the value for the
current thread.  Storing a value may return an error indication.  If
an error occurs retrieving a value, @code{NULL} is returned.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro int k5_key_delete (k5_key_t @var{key})
Called to indicate that the key value will no longer be used, for
example if the library is in the process of being unloaded.  The
destructor function should be called on objects of this type currently
allocated in any thread.  (XXX Not implemented yet.)
@end deftypefn

If support functions are needed to implement any of these macros,
they'll be in the Kerberos support library, and any exported symbols
will use the @code{krb5int_} prefix.  The shorter @code{k5_} prefix is
just for convenience, and should not be visible to any application
code.

@node Thread Shim Layer Implementation,  , Internal Thread API, Thread Safety
@section Thread Shim Layer Implementation

Each of the @code{k5_mutex_} macros has a corresponding
@code{k5_os_mutex_} macro which incorporates the operating system's
mutex object, a flag for non-threaded systems, or both if the use of
the OS pthread support is left until run time.  The @code{k5_mutex_}
wrappers add debugging information like the file and line number of
the last lock or unlock call, where the mutex was created, @i{etc}.
There may also be statistical information gathered, such as how long a
thread waits for a mutex or how long the mutex is held.  This is all
defined in @file{k5-thread.h}.

The thread-specific storage support is defined as macros expanding to
similar function names with the @code{krb5int_} prefix, which
functions are defined in @file{util/support/threads.c}.  POSIX,
Windows, and non-threaded versions are defined so far.

The code for collecting and reporting statistics is also mainly in
that file.  Macros defined in @file{k5-thread.h} will expand to
include calls to these functions, if @code{DEBUG_THREADS_STATS} is
defined, or do nothing.

@node Shared Libraries, Porting Issues, Thread Safety, Top
@chapter Shared Libraries

(These sections are old -- they should get updated.)

@menu
* Shared Library Theory::       
* Advanced Shared Library Requirements::  
* Operating System Notes for Shared Libraries::  
@end menu

@node Shared Library Theory, Advanced Shared Library Requirements, Shared Libraries, Shared Libraries
@section Theory of How Shared Libraries are Used

An explanation of how shared libraries are implemented on a given
platform is too broad a topic for this manual. Instead this will touch
on some of the issues that the Kerberos V5 tree uses to support version
numbering and alternate install locations.

Normally when one builds a shared library and then links with it, the
name of the shared library is stored in the object
(i.e. libfoo.so). Most operating systems allows one to change name that
is referenced and we have done so, placing the version number into the
shared library (i.e. libfoo.so.0.1). At link time, one would reference
libfoo.so, but when one executes the program, the shared library loader
would then look for the shared library with the alternate name.  Hence
multiple versions of shared libraries may be supported relatively
easily. @footnote{Under AIX for the RISC/6000, multiple versions of
shared libraries are supported by combining two or more versions of the
shared library into one file.  The Kerberos build procedure produces
shared libraries with version numbers in the internal module names, so
that the shared libraries are compatible with this scheme.
Unfortunately, combining two shared libraries requires internal
knowledge of the AIX shared library system beyond the scope of this
document.  Practically speaking, only one version of AIX shared libraries
can be supported on a system, unless the multi-version library is
constructed by a programmer familiar with the AIX internals.}

All operating systems (that we have seen) provide a means for programs
to specify the location of shared libraries.  On different operating
systems, this is either specified when creating the shared library, and
link time, or both.@footnote{Both are necessary sometimes as the shared
libraries are dependent on other shared libraries.}  The build process
will hardwire a path to the installed destination.

@node Advanced Shared Library Requirements, Operating System Notes for Shared Libraries, Shared Library Theory, Shared Libraries
@section Advanced Shared Library Requirements

In order to better support some multithreading models, and permit the
libraries to clean up internally maintained caches of information,
we've imposed new requirements on the OS shared library support.

Specifically, we want the ability to run certain bits of code in a
thread-safe manner at library load time, on multithreading platforms
not supporting @code{pthread_once}, and we want the ability to run
cleanup code when the library is unloaded.

In general, where platforms have initialization functions, we don't
always get an opportunity to return an error from them.  However, the
system functions we call can return errors.  So a framework has been
built that attempts to combine the @code{pthread_once} and load-time
initialization approaches, and add the ability to store an error code
indicating success or failure of the initialization routine.

The main implementation of this framework is in @file{k5-platform.h}.
Some additional information, specifically the names of the
initialization and finalization functions, are stored in the makefiles
used to generate each of the UNIX libraries, in @file{win_glue.c}, and
somewhere in the Mac OS X support (XXX not added yet?).  How the
information is used depends on the platform:

@itemize @bullet

@item
On platforms without any thread support, a simple flag is used, on the
assumption that the library code will have sole control over the
process execution until the initialization function returns.  (It's
generally a bad idea to call any ``interesting'' function like
@code{longjmp} or Kerberos functions from signal handlers; now it's a
slightly worse idea.)

@item
On platforms supporting @code{pthread_once}, library initialization is
generally delayed until the point where the library code needs to
verify that the initialization succeeded.  If @code{pthread_once} may
not have been linked into the executable and we can tell (for example,
with weak symbol references), this is combined with the simple-flag
approach above.

@item
On Windows, the library initialization function is run from
@file{win_glue.c} at load time; it should complete before the
library's symbol table is made accessible to the calling process.

Windows note: There are limitations on what @code{DllMain} should do
in the initialization and finalization cases, and unfortunately we've
found that we do some of these things (specifically, calling
@code{WSAStartup} and @code{WSACleanup}, and loading other libraries
which do so also).  Until we can rectify this problem, there is a
chance that explicitly unloading an MIT Kerberos library from an
application (more specifically, from within the @code{DllMain} of
another library) may cause a deadlock.
@end itemize

Library finalization is similarly dependent on the platform and
configuration:

@itemize @bullet

@item
In static-library builds, since the library will be unloaded only when
the entire process calls @code{exit} or @code{exec} or otherwise
ceases to exist in its current form, freeing up memory resources in
the process, finalization can be skipped.

@item
On UNIX platforms with library finalization support in shared
libraries, the (OS-level) finalization function is specified to run
the library's (shim-level) finalization function.  If @code{gcc}'s
``destructor'' attribute appears to work, we use that.

@item
On UNIX platforms without library finalization function support,
the finalization functions won't get called if the library is
unloaded.  Resources (probably just memory) will be leaked.

@item
On Windows, the finalization code is run out of @code{DllMain} in
@file{win_glue.c} at unload time.  See the warnings above.

@end itemize

If there are other limitations on what operations can be performed in
shared library initialization and finalization routines on some
systems, the MIT Kerberos team would appreciate specific information
on these limitations.

The internal interface currently used within the code of the Kerberos
libraries consists of four macros:

@defmac MAKE_INIT_FUNCTION (@var{fname})
Used at the top level of the file (@i{i.e.}, not within a function),
with a semicolon after it, declares @var{fname}, a function taking no
arguments and returning @code{int}, to be an initialization function.
This macro must be used before the function is declared, and it must
be defined in the current file as:
@example
int @var{fname} (void) @{ ... @}
@end example
This macro may define additional data and function objects,
and will declare @var{fname}, though it may or may not declare
@var{fname} as @code{static}.  (Under C rules, the declaration above
is compatible with a declaration of the function as @code{static}, and
@code{static} linkage does apply, as long as the @code{static} declaration
comes first.)

When the function is invoked, the return value --- zero or an error
code --- will be saved away, and returned any time
@code{CALL_INIT_FUNCTION} is used.

There can be multiple initialization functions defined this way in a
library.
@end defmac

@defmac MAKE_FINI_FUNCTION (@var{fname})
This is similar to @code{MAKE_INIT_FUNCTION} except that @var{fname}
is to be a library finalization function, called when the library is
no longer in use and is being unloaded from the address space.
@example
void @var{fname} (void) @{ ... @}
@end example

There may be multiple finalization functions defined for a library.
@end defmac

@deftypefn Macro int CALL_INIT_FUNCTION (@var{fname})
This macro ensures that the initialization function @var{fname} is
called at this point, if it has not been called already.  The macro
returns an error code that indicates success (zero), an error in the
OS support (@i{e.g.}, if @code{pthread_once} returns an error), or an
error returned by the initialization function.

Currently, all uses of @code{CALL_INIT_FUNCTION} must be in the same
file as the use of @code{MAKE_INIT_FUNCTION}, and must come after it.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro int INITIALIZER_RAN (@var{fname})
This macro returns non-zero iff the initialization function designated
by @var{fname} (and previously declared in the current file with
@code{MAKE_INIT_FUNCTION}) has been run, and returned no error
indication.

Since the finalization function might always be invoked through linker
support and initialization functions only sometimes invoked via
@code{pthread_once} in other functions that may not ever be called,
finalization functions should check whether the objects to be
destroyed have actually been created.  This macro provides one way of
doing that.
@end deftypefn

The @file{Makefile.in} for the library must define two variables,
@code{LIBINITFUNC} and @code{LIBFINIFUNC}, containing a (possibly
empty) list of the names of the initialization and finalization
functions for the library as built under UNIX, ordered from
lowest-level (initialized first, finalized last) to highest-level.
(Windows and Mac OS X builds work differently.)

Note that all of this assumes shared libraries.  If static linking is
done, our options are a bit more limited.  We assume
@code{pthread_once} is available if there is any thread support
(@i{i.e.}, we don't support static linking on Windows), and we assume
that finalization code would be called only when the process is
exiting, at which point all resources should be freed up anyways, so
it doesn't really matter whether our cleanup code gets called.  In
fact, it should be more efficient if it does not.

While one of our goals is to be able to repeatedly load, use, and
unload the MIT Kerberos libraries under a plugin architecture without
memory or other resource leaks, the main goal was to provide hooks
through which the library threading support could be properly
initialized on various platforms.  The hooks we've added should be
sufficient for each library to free up any internal caches of
information at unload time, and we have added some of that support,
but it is not complete at this time.


We have also started limiting the list of exported symbols from shared
libraries on some UNIX platforms, and intend to start doing symbol
versioning on platforms that support it.  The symbol lists we use for
UNIX at the moment are fairly all-inclusive, because we need more
symbols exported than are in the lists used for Windows and Mac
platforms, and we have not yet narrowed them down.  The current lists
should not be taken as an indication of what we intend to export and
support in the future; see @file{krb5.h} for that.

The export lists are stored in the directories in which each UNIX
library is built, and the commands set up at configuration time by
@file{shlib.conf} can specify any processing to be done on those files
(@i{e.g.}, insertion of leading underscores or linker command-line
arguments).

For some systems with somewhat non-trivial commands that need to be
run to convert the export list into the proper form, file targets can be
defined in @file{config/lib.in}.  

@node Operating System Notes for Shared Libraries,  , Advanced Shared Library Requirements, Shared Libraries
@section Operating System Notes for Shared Libraries

From time to time users or developers suggest using GNU @code{Libtool}
or some other mechanism to  generate shared libraries.  Experience
with other packages suggests that Libtool tends to be difficult to
debug and when it works incorrectly, patches are required to generated
scripts to work around problems.  So far, the Kerberos shared library
build mechanism, which sets a variety of makefile variables based on
operating system type and then uses those variables in the build
process has proven to be easier to debug and adequate to the task of
building shared libraries for Kerberos.

@menu
* AIX Shared Library Support::  
* Alpha OSF/1 Shared Library Support::  
@end menu

@node AIX Shared Library Support, Alpha OSF/1 Shared Library Support, Operating System Notes for Shared Libraries, Operating System Notes for Shared Libraries
@subsection AIX Shared Library Support

        AIX specifies shared library versions by combining multiple
versions into a single file.  Because of the complexity of this process,
no automatic procedure for building multi-versioned shared libraries is
provided. Therefore, supporting multiple versions of the Kerberos shared
libraries under AIX will require significant work on the part of a
programmer famiiliar with AIX internals.  

        AIX allows a single library to be used both as a static library
and as a shared library.  For this reason, the @samp{--enable-shared}
switch to configure builds only shared libraries.  On other operating
systems, both shared and static libraries are built when this switch is
specified.  As with all other operating systems, only non-shared static
libraries are built when @samp{--enable-shared} is not specified.

        The AIX 3.2.5 linker dumps core trying to build a shared
@samp{libkrb5.a} produced with the GNU C compiler.  The native AIX
compiler works fine.  In addition, the AIX 4.1 linker is able to build a
shared @samp{libkrb5.a} when GNU C is used.


@node Alpha OSF/1 Shared Library Support,  , AIX Shared Library Support, Operating System Notes for Shared Libraries
@subsection Alpha OSF/1 Shared Library Support

Shared library support has been tested with V2.1 and higher of the
operating system. Shared libraries may be compiled both with GCC and the
native compiler.

One of the nice features on this platform is that the paths to the
shared libraries is specified in the library itself without requiring
that one specify the same at link time. 

We are using the @samp{-rpath} option to @samp{ld} to place the library
load path into the executables. The one disadvantage of this is during
testing where we want to make sure that we are using the build tree
instead of a possibly installed library. The loader uses the contents of
@samp{-rpath} before LD_LIBRARY_PATH so we must specify a dummy _RLD_ROOT
and complete LD_LIBRARY_PATH in our tests.

The one disadvantage with the method we are using....

@node Porting Issues,  , Shared Libraries, Top
@chapter Porting Issues

[Snipped from email from Ken Raeburn in reply to email asking about
porting MIT Kerberos to pSOS; maybe it'll be of use to someone else.]

> - Any Porting issues to be considered?

Yes.  Our build procedure currently assumes that the machine used for
building is either a UNIX (or similar) system, or running Windows; it
also assumes that it's a native compilation, not a cross compilation.
I'm not familiar with pSOS, but assuming that you do cross compilation
on another OS, how you deal with that depends on the host system.

UNIX host: The configure script attempts to learn a bunch of
attributes about the host system (program names, availability of
header files and functions and libraries) and uses them to decide how
to build the krb5 libraries and programs.  Many attributes are tested
by running the compiler with various options and test source files, so
if you tell the configure script to run a cross compiler, it may come
up with most of the right answers, if you can arrange for success and
failure indications to be given at compile/link time.  (This probably
wouldn't work well for VxWorks, for example, where symbol resolution
is done when the object code is loaded into the OS.)

The configure script generates include/autoconf.h to influence
whether certain calls are made or certain headers are included, and
Makefile in each directory to indicate compilation options.  Each
source directory has a Makefile.in, and config/pre.in and
config/post.in are incorporated into each generate Makefile.  Various
@@FOO@@ sequences are substituted based on the system attributes or
configure options.  (Aside from always using the config/ fragments,
this is typical of GNU Autoconf based software configuration.)

Windows host: The ``wconfig'' program generates the Makefiles in
subdirectories, with config/win-pre.in and config/win-post.in used in
combination with each Makefile.in, and lines starting @code{##WIN32##}
are uncommented, but @code{@@FOO@@} substitutions are not done.
Instead of generating @file{autoconf.h}, it's copied from
@file{include/win-mac.h}, where we've hardcoded some of the parameters
we care about, and just left a bunch of others out.  If you work with
a Windows host, you may want to provide your own makefile fragments,
and a replacement for @file{win-mac.h} or some additional data to go
into it conditionalized on some preprocessor symbol for pSOS.

There are also places where we assume that certain header files or
functions are available, because both (most) UNIX and Windows
platforms (that we care about currently) provide them.  And probably a
handful of places where we check for @code{_WIN32} to decide between ``the
Windows way'' and ``everything else'' (i.e., UNIX); you might need to add
a third branch for pSOS.  And some places where we've got hooks for
Kerberos for Mac support, which you can probably ignore.

Our build environment assumes that Perl is available, but it's only
needed in the build process, not for run time.  If Tcl is available,
on UNIX, a few more programs may be built that are used for testing
some interfaces, but a cross compiler should notice that it can't link
against the native Tcl libraries, and configure should choose not to
build those programs.

In the current 1.4 beta code, our library wants to find routines for
making DNS queries (SRV and TXT RR queries specifically) that are
outside the scope of getaddrinfo and friends.  We also look for
@file{/dev/random} as a strong random number source, and text files
for configuration information.  Our code assumes that allocating and
reallocating lots of little (or not so little) bits of memory isn't
too horribly expensive, and we don't take any special pains to keep
our stack size small.  Depending how pSOS works, you may need to add
to the thread support code.  (The MIT code doesn't create threads, but
will do locking and such to allow multiple threads to share global
data.  The code in @file{include/k5-thread.h} is, uh, kind of
involved, and some pains have been taken to use macros whenever
possible to allow @code{assert()} calls during debugging to report
useful line numbers.)  There are probably other minor issues to deal
with, I'm just making some guesses.

> - what type of Data formats exchanged between Client and Server?

If you're aiming for a server implementation only, it'll depend on the
exact protocol you wish to use, but typically the Kerberos application
server needs to accept the AP-REQ message and generate the AP-REP
message.  Protection for the data to be transferred depends on on the
application protocol.  For example, Kerberos provides some message
types for encapsulating application data with or without encryption;
the Kerberos mechanism for GSSAPI uses the Kerberos session key to
protect application data in a different message format.

The server implementation would also need some secure means of getting
the service principal's key stored away.

If you want client code support as well under pSOS, then you may have
to deal with DNS queries to find the KDC,
AS-REQ/AS-REP/TGS-REQ/TGS-REP message exchanges, and generating AP-REQ
and accepting AP-REP messages, etc.

@contents
@bye
