The @code{krb5.conf} file contains Kerberos configuration information,
including the locations of KDCs and admin servers for the Kerberos
realms of interest, defaults for the current realm and for Kerberos
applications, and mappings of hostnames onto Kerberos realms.  Normally,
you should install your @code{krb5.conf} file in the directory
@code{/etc}.  You can override the default location by setting the
environment variable @samp{KRB5_CONFIG}.

The @code{krb5.conf} file is set up in the style of a Windows INI file.
Sections are headed by the section name, in square brackets.  Each
section may contain zero or more relations, of the form:

@smallexample
foo = bar
@end smallexample

@noindent
or

@smallexample
@group
fubar = @{
        foo = bar
        baz = quux
@}
@end group
@end smallexample

Placing a `*' at the end of a line indicates that this is the
@dfn{final} value for the tag.  This means that neither the remainder
of this configuration file nor any other configuration file will be
checked for any other values for this tag.

For example, if you have the following lines:

@smallexample
foo = bar*
foo = baz
@end smallexample

then the second value of foo (baz) would never be read.

The @code{krb5.conf} file may contain any or all of the following 
sections:

@table @b
@itemx libdefaults
Contains default values used by the Kerberos V5 library.

@itemx login
Contains default values used by the Kerberos V5 login program.

@itemx appdefaults
Contains default values that can be used by Kerberos V5 applications.

@itemx realms
Contains subsections keyed by Kerberos realm names.  Each subsection
describes realm-specific information, including where to find the
Kerberos servers for that realm.

@itemx domain_realm
Contains relations which map domain names and subdomains onto Kerberos
realm names.  This is used by programs to determine what realm a host
should be in, given its fully qualified domain name.

@itemx logging
Contains relations which determine how Kerberos programs are to perform
logging.

@itemx capaths
Contains the authentication paths used with direct (nonhierarchical)
cross-realm authentication.  Entries in this section are used by the
client to determine the intermediate realms which may be used in
cross-realm authentication.  It is also used by the end-service when
checking the transited field for trusted intermediate realms.

@ignore
this doesn't seem to be used
@itemx kdc
For a KDC, may contain the location of the kdc.conf file.
@end ignore

@end table
