In any complex software, there will be bugs.  If you have successfully
built and installed @value{PRODUCT}, please use the @code{krb5-send-pr}
program to fill out a Problem Report should you encounter any errors in
our software.

Bug reports that include proposed fixes are especially welcome.  If you
do include fixes, please send them using either context diffs or unified
diffs (using @samp{diff -c} or @samp{diff -u}, respectively).  Please be
careful when using ``cut and paste'' or other such means to copy a patch
into a bug report; depending on the system being used, that can result
in converting TAB characters into spaces, which makes applying the
patches more difficult.

The @code{krb5-send-pr} program is installed in the directory
@code{@value{ROOTDIR}/sbin}.

The @code{krb5-send-pr} program enters the problem report into our
Problem Report Management System (PRMS), which automatically assigns it
to the engineer best able to help you with problems in the assigned
category.
@ifset CYGNUS
The engineer will work with you via email, telephone, or both, and all
email related to this Problem Report will be tracked by PRMS for future
reference.  If you need to talk to someone else in our organization
about the problem (@i{e.g.}, if the engineer gets hit by a truck), we
can find out what the current state is through the PR number.
@end ifset

The @code{krb5-send-pr} program will try to intelligently fill in as
many fields as it can.  You need to choose the @dfn{category},
@dfn{class}, @dfn{severity}, and @dfn{priority} of the problem, as well
as giving us as much information as you can about its exact nature.

@need 1000
The PR @b{category} will be one of:

@smallexample
@group
krb5-admin   krb5-appl    krb5-build   krb5-clients 
krb5-doc     krb5-kdc     krb5-libs    krb5-misc    
pty          telnet       test         
@end group
@end smallexample

@noindent
Choose the category that best describes the area under which your
problem falls.

The @b{class} can be @dfn{sw-bug}, @dfn{doc-bug}, @dfn{change-request},
or @dfn{support}.  The first two are exactly as their names imply.  Use
@i{change-request} when the software is behaving according to
specifications, but you want to request changes in some feature or
behavior.  The @i{support} class is intended for more general questions
about building or using @value{PRODUCT}.

The @b{severity} of the problem indicates the problem's impact on the
usability of @value{PRODUCT}.  If a problem is @dfn{critical}, that
means the product, component or concept is completely non-operational,
or some essential functionality is missing, and no workaround is known.
A @dfn{serious} problem is one in which the product, component or
concept is not working properly or significant functionality is missing.
Problems that would otherwise be considered @i{critical} are rated
@i{serious} when a workaround is known.  A @dfn{non-critical} problem is
one that is indeed a problem, but one that is having a minimal effect on
your ability to use @value{PRODUCT}.  @i{E.g.}, The product, component
or concept is working in general, but lacks features, has irritating
behavior, does something wrong, or doesn't match its documentation.  The
default severity is @i{serious}.

The @b{priority} indicates how urgent this particular problem is in
relation to your work.  Note that low priority does not imply low
importance.
@ifset CYGNUS
@value{COMPANY} considers all problems important, and
encourages its customers to be realistic about priority ratings.
@end ifset
A priority of @dfn{high} means a solution is needed as soon as possible.
A priority of @dfn{medium} means the problem should be solved no later
than the next release.  A priority of @dfn{low} means the problem should
be solved in a future release, but it is not important to your work how
soon this happens.  The default priority is @i{medium}.

Note that a given severity does not necessarily imply a given priority.
For example, a non-critical problem might still have a high priority if
you are faced with a hard deadline.  Conversely, a serious problem might
have a low priority if the feature it is disabling is one that you do
not need.

It is important that you fill in the @i{release} field and tell us
what changes you have made, if any.

@iftex
@vfill
@end iftex

@page
A sample filled-out form from a company named ``Toasters, Inc.'' might
look like this:

@smallexample
@group
To: krb5-bugs@@mit.edu
Subject: misspelled "Kerberos" in title of installation guide
From: jcb
Reply-To: jcb
Cc: 
X-send-pr-version: 3.99


>Submitter-Id:	mit
>Originator:	Jeffrey C. Gilman Bigler
>Organization:
mit
>Confidential:	no
>Synopsis:	Misspelled "Kerberos" in title of installation guide
>Severity:	non-critical
>Priority:	low
>Category:	krb5-doc
>Class:		doc-bug
>Release:	1.0-development
>Environment:
	<machine, os, target, libraries (multiple lines)>
System: ULTRIX imbrium 4.2 0 RISC
Machine: mips
>Description:
        Misspelled "Kerberos" in title of "Kerboros V5 Installation Guide"
>How-To-Repeat:
        N/A
>Fix:
        Correct the spelling.
@end group        
@end smallexample

@iftex
@vfill
@end iftex

If the @code{krb5-send-pr} program does not work for you, or if you did
not get far enough in the process to have an installed and working
@code{krb5-send-pr}, you can generate your own form, using the above as
an example.



