@c This file is included by autoconf.texi and is used to produce
@c the INSTALL file.

@node Basic Installation
@section Basic Installation

These are generic installation instructions.

The @code{configure} shell script attempts to guess correct values for
various system-dependent variables used during compilation.  It uses
those values to create a @file{Makefile} in each directory of the
package.  It may also create one or more @file{.h} files containing
system-dependent definitions.  Finally, it creates a shell script
@file{config.status} that you can run in the future to recreate the
current configuration, a file @file{config.cache} that saves the results
of its tests to speed up reconfiguring, and a file @file{config.log}
containing compiler output (useful mainly for debugging
@code{configure}).

If you need to do unusual things to compile the package, please try to
figure out how @code{configure} could check whether to do them, and mail
diffs or instructions to the address given in the @file{README} so they
can be considered for the next release.  If at some point
@file{config.cache} contains results you don't want to keep, you may
remove or edit it.

The file @file{configure.in} is used to create @file{configure} by a
program called @code{autoconf}.  You only need @file{configure.in} if
you want to change it or regenerate @file{configure} using a newer
version of @code{autoconf}.

@noindent
The simplest way to compile this package is:

@enumerate
@item
@code{cd} to the directory containing the package's source code and type
@samp{./configure} to configure the package for your system.  If you're
using @code{csh} on an old version of System V, you might need to type
@samp{sh ./configure} instead to prevent @code{csh} from trying to
execute @code{configure} itself.

Running @code{configure} takes awhile.  While running, it prints some
messages telling which features it is checking for.

@item
Type @samp{make} to compile the package.

@item
Optionally, type @samp{make check} to run any self-tests that come with
the package.

@item
Type @samp{make install} to install the programs and any data files and
documentation.

@item
You can remove the program binaries and object files from the source
directory by typing @samp{make clean}.  To also remove the files that
@code{configure} created (so you can compile the package for a different
kind of computer), type @samp{make distclean}.
@end enumerate

@node Compilers and Options
@section Compilers and Options

Some systems require unusual options for compilation or linking that
the @code{configure} script does not know about.  You can give
@code{configure} initial values for variables by setting them in the
environment.  Using a Bourne-compatible shell, you can do that on the
command line like this:
@example
CC=c89 CFLAGS=-O2 LIBS=-lposix ./configure
@end example

@noindent
Or on systems that have the @code{env} program, you can do it like this:
@example
env CPPFLAGS=-I/usr/local/include LDFLAGS=-s ./configure
@end example

@node Build Directory
@section Using a Different Build Directory

You can compile the package in a different directory from the one
containing the source code.  Doing so allows you to compile it on more
than one kind of computer at the same time.  To do this, you must use a
version of @code{make} that supports the @code{VPATH} variable, such as
GNU @code{make}.  @code{cd} to the directory where you want the object
files and executables to go and run the @code{configure} script.
@code{configure} automatically checks for the source code in the
directory that @code{configure} is in and in @file{..}.

@node Installation Names
@section Installation Names

By default, @samp{make install} will install the package's files in
@file{/usr/local/bin}, @file{/usr/local/man}, etc.  You can specify an
installation prefix other than @file{/usr/local} by giving
@code{configure} the option @samp{--prefix=@var{path}}.

You can specify separate installation prefixes for architecture-specific
files and architecture-independent files.  If you give @code{configure}
the option @samp{--exec-prefix=@var{path}}, the package will use
@var{path} as the prefix for installing programs and libraries.
Documentation and other data files will still use the regular prefix.

If the package supports it, you can cause programs to be installed with
an extra prefix or suffix on their names by giving @code{configure} the
option @samp{--program-prefix=@var{PREFIX}} or
@samp{--program-suffix=@var{SUFFIX}}.

@node Optional Features
@section Optional Features

Some packages pay attention to @samp{--enable-@var{feature}} options to
@code{configure}, where @var{feature} indicates an optional part of the
package.  They may also pay attention to @samp{--with-@var{package}}
options, where @var{package} is something like @samp{gnu-as} or @samp{x}
(for the X Window System).  The @file{README} should mention any
@samp{--enable-} and @samp{--with-} options that the package recognizes.

For packages that use the X Window System, @code{configure} can usually
find the X include and library files automatically, but if it doesn't,
you can use the @code{configure} options @samp{--x-includes=@var{dir}}
and @samp{--x-libraries=@var{dir}} to specify their locations.

@node System Type
@section Specifying the System Type

There may be some features @code{configure} can not figure out
automatically, but needs to determine by the type of host the package
will run on.  Usually @code{configure} can figure that out, but if it
prints a message saying it can not guess the host type, give it the
@samp{--host=@var{type}} option.  @var{type} can either be a short name
for the system type, such as @samp{sun4}, or a canonical name with three
fields:
@example
@var{cpu}-@var{company}-@var{system}
@end example
@noindent
See the file @file{config.sub} for the possible values of each field.
If @file{config.sub} isn't included in this package, then this package
doesn't need to know the host type.

If you are building compiler tools for cross-compiling, you can also use
the @samp{--target=@var{type}} option to select the type of system
they will produce code for and the @samp{--build=@var{type}} option
to select the type of system on which you are compiling the package.

@node Sharing Defaults
@section Sharing Defaults

If you want to set default values for @code{configure} scripts to share,
you can create a site shell script called @file{config.site} that gives
default values for variables like @code{CC}, @code{cache_file}, and
@code{prefix}.  @code{configure} looks for
@file{@var{prefix}/share/config.site} if it exists, then
@file{@var{prefix}/etc/config.site} if it exists.  Or, you can set
the @code{CONFIG_SITE} environment variable to the location of the site
script.  A warning: not all @code{configure} scripts look for a site script.

@node Operation Controls
@section Operation Controls

@code{configure} recognizes the following options to control how it
operates.

@table @code
@item --cache-file=@var{file}
Save the results of the tests in @var{file} instead of
@file{config.cache}.  Set @var{file} to @file{/dev/null} to disable
caching, for debugging @code{configure}.

@item --help
Print a summary of the options to @code{configure}, and exit.

@item --quiet
@itemx --silent
@itemx -q
Do not print messages saying which checks are being made.

@item --srcdir=@var{dir}
Look for the package's source code in directory @var{dir}.  Usually
@code{configure} can determine that directory automatically.

@item --version
Print the version of Autoconf used to generate the @code{configure}
script, and exit.
@end table

@noindent
@code{configure} also accepts some other, not widely useful, options.
